
===== [PAGE 1] =====
Can Scale Save Us From Plasticity Loss in Large
Language Models?
J. Fernando Hernandez-Garcia *, Tomas Figliolia *, Beren Millidge
Zyphra
San Francisco, CA
*Corresponding authors:fernando@zyphra.com,tom@zyphra.com
Abstract—The loss of plasticity – the ability of a network to learn
new information after having already learned older information – is a
fundamental challenge in creating artificial neural networks capable
of continual learning. Although this phenomenon has been known for
decades, it has mostly been studied in older, relatively small architec-
tures and rarely in natural-language domains. To determine whether
loss of plasticity remains a problem in the modern transformer-based
LLM paradigm, we study plasticity loss in GPT-style Transformer
models trained on a multilingual continual learning problem. Consis-
tent with prior work, we find evidence of plasticity loss across models
ranging from 5M to 314M non-embedding parameters, as measured
by deterioration on a held-out Vietnamese probing task. We further
find that the onset of plasticity loss follows a predictable scaling
law, growing sublinearly with model size. These results suggest that
larger models may delay the measurable effects of plasticity loss,
but that increasing parameter count alone is likely to be insufficient
to completely prevent it. We also find evidence of plasticity loss
under stationary multilingual training, challenging the view that the
phenomenon is exclusive to continual learning with abrupt task
changes. Overall, our results suggest that even large Transformer
language models trained on natural-language will eventually lose the
ability to efficiently adapt to new data after sufficiently long training,
in both continual and stationary settings.
I. INTRODUCTION
Neural networks trained for extended periods on chang-
ing data can gradually lose their ability to learn from new
observations—a phenomenon known asloss of plasticity(Ash
& Adams, 2020; Lyle et al., 2022; Nikishin et al., 2022;
Dohare et al., 2024). In this work, we operationalize plasticity
loss as a degradation in a model’s ability to improve on a target
distribution under a fixed training budget. This phenomenon
represents a fundamental challenge for developing systems
capable of continual learning, since such systems must be
capable of incorporating new information without losing the
ability to adapt. Importantly, loss of plasticity differs from
catastrophic forgetting in that plasticity loss is about the
network becoming incapable of learning new information,
rather than forgetting old information.
Continual learning is a fundamental frontier for language
models, whose usefulness depends on their ability to adapt to
new facts, domains, languages, codebases, and user needs. For
example, continual learning could help mitigate knowledge
cutoffs and allow coding agents to adapt to new reposito-
ries without relying entirely on in-context learning via long
prompts. Because of this promise, understanding and prevent-
ing plasticity loss has become an increasingly active area
of research (Kumar et al., 2024; Lyle et al., 2024b; Chung
et al., 2024; Elsayed et al., 2024; Elsayed & Mahmood, 2024;
Lewandowski et al., 2024; Lyle et al., 2024a; Liu & Mou,
2026; Lillo & Cheney, 2026).
While research on plasticity loss has expanded to include
a wider range of domains and architectures, there are still
few studies of the phenomenon in natural-language settings
with large Transformer models, especially at scale. Previous
work involving Transformer architectures has either focused
on vision domains (Lyle et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024;
Hernandez-Garcia et al., 2025; Lewandowski et al., 2025)
or used synthetic text data (Farias & Jozefiak, 2025), often
with networks containing fewer than 20 million parameters.
In natural-language settings with large Transformer models,
existing evaluations have considered relatively few tasks, mak-
ing it difficult to characterize the onset and progression of
plasticity loss (Cho et al., 2026). Thus, it remains unclear
whether GPT-style models trained on realistic text streams
exhibit plasticity loss, how this effect changes with model
scale, and whether it is a practical problem in real-world
applications.
In this paper, we investigate plasticity loss in GPT-style
decoder-only Transformer models trained on natural-language
data. Unlike the original Transformer architecture of Vaswani
et al. (2017), which used post-layer normalization, our mod-
els use the pre-layer-normalization architecture common in
modern language models (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). To measure loss of plasticity,
we introduce a multilingual next-token prediction problem
in which languages are presented one at a time for a fixed
number of tokens, and the process cycles through a sequence
of languages so that training can be extended indefinitely. We
then periodically evaluate how efficiently each model adapts
to a held-out Vietnamese probing task that is not included in
the continual pretraining sequence.
Our experiments show evidence of plasticity loss in models
ranging from 5M to 314M non-embedding parameters, with
smaller models exhibiting measurable deterioration earlier. We
find that the onset of plasticity loss follows a predictable
sublinear, power-law scaling with model size, suggesting
diminishing returns from increasing parameter count alone
as a mitigation strategy. We also find evidence of plasticity
loss under stationary multilingual training, indicating that
arXiv:2606.24752v1  [cs.AI]  23 Jun 2026
===== [PAGE 2] =====
abrupt task changes, which are common in the plasticity loss
literature but uncommon in practice, are not necessary for the
phenomenon to emerge. Finally, we measure several correlates
of plasticity loss, including parameter growth, dormant units,
and collapsed or lazy attention heads, which provide clues for
designing methods that maintain plasticity over long training
horizons. However, we do not yet manage to find a ’smoking
gun’ to diagnose and counteract plasticity loss in LLMs.
II. BACKGROUND
The finding that artificial neural networks can lose their
ability to learn after training dates back more than two
decades (Smith et al., 2000; Ellis & Lambon Ralph, 2000).
Recent work has shown that this phenomenon is not merely a
pathology of early neural networks, but also arises in modern
deep learning systems trained for extended periods (Lyle et al.,
2022; Nikishin et al., 2022; Dohare et al., 2023; Abbas et al.,
2023). These observations have motivated a growing body of
work aimed at characterizing when plasticity loss occurs, how
broadly it appears across architectures and domains, and how
it might be prevented.
Loss of plasticity has been observed in feedforward net-
works (Dohare et al., 2024; Lyle et al., 2023; Kumar
et al., 2024; Elsayed & Mahmood, 2024), convolutional net-
works (Abbas et al., 2023; Nikishin et al., 2022; Lee et al.,
2023), residual networks (Dohare et al., 2024; Lyle et al.,
2023; Lee et al., 2024), and Transformer architectures (Lyle
et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024; Hernandez-Garcia et al., 2025;
Farias & Jozefiak, 2025; Cho et al., 2026; Liu & Mou,
2026). In addition, the phenomenon has been observed across
multiple learning problems, such as supervised learning, re-
inforcement learning, and self-supervised learning (Springer
et al., 2025)—though the authors named the phenomenon over-
training. Thus, the generality of plasticity loss has been slowly
recognized by the community.
Investigations into plasticity loss have provided insight into
the conditions under which the phenomenon is most likely to
occur. Dohare et al. (2024) showed, using synthetic experi-
ments based on MNIST, that plasticity loss tends to emerge
after extended training on non-stationary data. Moreover,
these experiments showed that the onset of the phenomenon
occurs earlier in smaller networks. Similarly, Lyle et al.
(2023) showed that larger networks are more robust to the
phenomenon in synthetic tasks based on the CIFAR-10 and
MNIST datasets. Although insightful, these investigations have
been limited to synthetic problems based on vision datasets
using feedforward or convolutional networks, and thus provide
little evidence for the phenomenon in more realistic models
and at scale.
Previous work has also investigated plasticity loss in the
language domain, but existing studies leave open whether the
phenomenon appears in GPT-style Transformer models trained
on realistic natural-language streams for many tasks. Farias
& Jozefiak (2025) found severe plasticity loss in a GPT-style
model; however, the learning problem used synthetic text data,
and the model contained fewer than a million parameters.
Similarly, Liu & Mou (2026) found loss of plasticity in a
single-layer T5 model (Raffel et al., 2020) on a synthetic
language problem. Cho et al. (2026) presented an algorithm for
maintaining plasticity and preventing forgetting when learning
from text data using models with more than a billion parame-
ters. However, their evaluations of plasticity loss included only
eight different tasks, which, even in synthetic problems with
small networks, may be insufficient to reliably observe the
onset of plasticity loss. Lastly, Springer et al. (2025) presented
the most comprehensive study of plasticity loss in language
models, but focused on the downstream effects of extended
pretraining rather than the evolution of the phenomenon in a
continual learning setting.
This paper addresses these gaps by studying plasticity
loss in continual learning with realistic natural-language data.
We study a range of GPT-style Transformer model sizes,
complementing the stationary-learning results of Springer et al.
(2025) with experiments in a non-stationary continual learning
regime. Lastly, we train on a large number of tokens and tasks
to test whether plasticity loss emerges in natural-language
Transformer training and whether its onset changes predictably
with model size. Moreover, we believe that our naturalistic
multilingual training and evaluation framework provides a
useful task to elicit loss of plasticity for future works to build
upon.
III. LEARNINGPROBLEM
Our study of plasticity loss follows the continual learning
setting in which a model is trained on a sequence of learning
problems, or tasks (Wang et al., 2024). Letτ∈ {1,2, . . . , k}
denote the sequence of tasks encountered during training. Each
taskτhas a corresponding space of observationsX τ , targets
Yτ , and a probability distribution over observation-target pairs,
(x,y)∼ D τ . The goal of the learning system is to predict the
targetycorresponding to an observationx.
We focus on learning systems based on deep neural net-
works, represented by functionsf θ parameterized byθ∈R w,
wherew∈N. For a taskτ, the objective is to find parameters
that minimize the expected loss
Lτ(θ)
.
=E (x,y)∼Dτ [ℓ(fθ(x),y)]
whereℓmeasures the discrepancy between the model’s pre-
dictions and the target. In practice, we do not have access to
the full data distribution. Instead, for each taskτ, the model
is trained on a finite datasetD τ = (xi,y i)Nτ
i=1 by minimizing
the empirical loss using mini-batch gradient descent.
A fundamental challenge in continual learning is how
to incorporate information from new observations without
losing previously acquired knowledge, a tension known as
the stability-plasticity dilemma (Mermillod et al., 2013; Abel
et al., 2026). Stability refers to the ability to retain performance
on previously encountered tasks, while plasticity refers to the
ability to learn from new data. Stability has been extensively
studied resulting in a large literature dedicated in preventing
catastrophic forgetting in neural networks (McCloskey &
Cohen, 1989; French, 1999; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). In this
2
===== [PAGE 3] =====
paper, we focus on plasticity: whether a model trained for an
extended period retains the ability to improve on a new target
distribution under a fixed training budget.
Plasticity can be measured in different ways. One approach
is to measure learning online, as the model encounters each
new task in the training sequence (Dohare et al., 2024).
Another approach is to periodically evaluate the model on
a held-out probing task that is not part of the training se-
quence (Lyle et al., 2023). We adopt the latter approach since
the former requires tasks to be equally difficult to accurately
assess plasticity loss. Thus, at selected points during training,
we train on a held-out task and evaluate how efficiently the
current model adapts to the new distribution. A degradation in
performance over time indicates that the model has lost some
of its ability to learn from new observations.
IV. EXPERIMENTALSETUP
A. Multilingual Continual Learning Problem
We looked for three desiderata in designing a continual
learning problem suitable for studying plasticity loss with large
language models:
1) The data should be natural-language, overcoming the
shortcomings of previous studies using synthetic datasets.
2) The sequence of tasks should be extendable indefinitely to
enable the training length required to observe measurable
effects of plasticity loss.
3) The tasks should be naturalistic and challenging enough
for scale to result in meaningful improvements in perfor-
mance.
Guided by these desiderata, we created a multilingual next-
token prediction problem based on sequences of languages
from the CulturaX dataset curated by Nguyen et al. (2024).
The dataset comprises 167 languages and 6.3 trillion tokens.
We selected a subset of eight languages from the CulturaX
dataset and then created training and evaluation datasets of
100 billion and 1 billion tokens, respectively, for each selected
language. We trained networks on the following sequence
of languages: English, written Chinese, French, Japanese,
Spanish, German, Portuguese, and Russian, in that order. Each
time a language appeared in the sequence, the model was
trained on a fresh task instance consisting of 5 billion tokens
sampled from the corresponding language’s training set. We
call a complete sequence of eight task instances acycle, and
trained networks for several cycles. We refer to training on
this non-stationary sequence of task instances ascontinual
pretraining.
For the purpose of assessing plasticity loss, we created
a separate training and validation set from the Vietnamese
language consisting of 20 billion training tokens and 1 billion
evaluation tokens, respectively. At the end of each cycle,
we conducted a probing task consisting of 5 billion training
tokens randomly subsampled from the Vietnamese 20 billion-
token training set. Probing was performed on a copy of
the model checkpoint, and the resulting parameter updates
were discarded before continual pretraining resumed. Thus,
Fig. 1: Multilingual continual learning problem. Models are
trained on repeated cycles of eight language-modeling task
instances. At the end of each cycle, plasticity is assessed using
a held-out Vietnamese probing task.
Vietnamese data were used only to measure the model’s ability
to learn new information and did not become part of the
continual pretraining sequence. We illustrate the continual
pretraining and probing process in Figure 1.
The language sequence was selected to reduce similarity
between consecutive languages. Similarly, the probing lan-
guage Vietnamese, as the only austroasiatic language in the
training set, was selected to reduce similarity between the
probing distribution and the continual pretraining data, limiting
transfer and ensuring that probing contained genuinely new
information. Since Vietnamese was not included in any cycle,
the Vietnamese probing task contained data that had not
been observed by model during continual pretraining, and for
which we expect transfer from other languages to be low.
Consequently, performance by training on the new language
indicates how well the model can learn from new observations.
During the probing task, we trained for 5B tokens on the
new Vietnamese language data, and measured the validation
loss using 1,280 randomly sampled sequences of length 2,048
every 95 training steps. To assess how efficiently the model
learned during probing, we used the area under the validation-
loss curve as a function of probe-training steps. Lower AUC
values indicate that validation loss decreased earlier during
probing, corresponding to faster adaptation.
3
===== [PAGE 4] =====
B. Architectures and Training Details
We trained several GPT-style pre-norm decoder-only Trans-
former models (Radford et al., 2018) of varying sizes. All
models use causal self-attention, absolute positional embed-
dings, pre-layer normalization, an MLP expansion factor of
4, GeLU activations, tied input and output embeddings, and a
trained embedding table. When choosing the model configu-
rations, we aimed to minimize architectural variation across
scales so that changes in performance could be attributed
primarily to model size rather than to differences in width-
depth trade-offs. We therefore fixed the aspect ratio of all
models, defined asd model/L, to 80, whered model is the
Transformer hidden dimension andLis the number of layers.
For the same reason, we kept the attention-head dimension
fixed at 64, preventing larger models from gaining additional
per-head capacity as model size increased.
We trained models at eight different sizes: 5M, 12M,
27M, 39M, 53M, 83M, 106M, and 314M non-embedding
parameters. We report model size using non-embedding pa-
rameters because the embedding table size is dominated by the
tokenizer vocabulary and does not scale in the same way as
the Transformer stack. This choice makes model size a better
proxy for the capacity of the Transformer layers whose width
and depth vary across experiments. For tokenization, we used
the pretrained Qwen3 tokenizer (Yang et al., 2025), which has
reasonable coverage across a wide variety of languages and
a vocabulary size of 151,680. For total parameter counts and
additional architectural details, see Appendix A.
All models were trained with a sequence length of 2,048
using AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019), withβ 1 = 0.9,
β2 = 0.95, a weight decay of 0.1, and a batch size of 0.5M
tokens. We used a learning rate schedule with linear warm-
up for the first 5% of the total training steps, followed by a
constant learning rate. Each task consisted of 9,537 training
steps.
We tuned the learning rate using grid searches on the
smallest and largest models, training the 5M and 314M models
on 5 billion English-language tokens. For each of these two
models, we selected the learning rate that minimized the loss
under this fixed token budget. The best learning rates for
the 5M and 314M models were3×10 −3 and1×10 −3,
respectively. We then interpolated between these two endpoints
to determine the learning rates for the intermediate model sizes
(see Appendix A). To validate this procedure, we compared
the losses obtained using the interpolated learning rates with
the losses obtained during additional grid searches for inter-
mediate model sizes. The interpolated learning rates produced
lower loss than the values tested in those grid searches.
The optimizer was reset at the start of each task; this
procedure has been shown to prevent training instabilities
caused by sudden changes in the loss landscape (Asadi et al.,
2023), and also implies that the plasticity degradations we
observed were due to inherent plasticity loss in the weights
rather than simply stale optimizer states. To further smooth
transitions between tasks, we restarted the learning rate warm-
up at the beginning of each task. For further details on
hyperparameter selection and values, see Appendix A.
V. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
A. Emergence and Scaling of Plasticity Loss in Continual
Pretraining
At the start of our study, we asked a simple question:is
there evidence of plasticity loss in continual learning problems
based on natural-language?To answer this question, we
trained each model on our Multilingual Continual Learning
Problem for several cycles and probed at the end of each cycle.
We measured learning efficiency using the area under the
validation-loss curve (AUC) as the model learned the probing
task, with lower AUC indicating faster or more effective
adaptation.
In this setting, a decrease in probing AUC across cycles
indicates improved probing performance, consistent with ben-
eficial transfer from continual pretraining to the probing task—
i.e. from learning other languages to learning Vietnamese. In
contrast, an increasing trend in probing AUC indicates that the
model is becoming less able to learn from new data—a loss
of plasticity. Since models vary in their absolute performance
on Vietnamese due to inherent differences in capacity, we
normalize each model’s probing performance relative to its
performance after the first cycle. Specifically, letAUCk denote
the AUC measured on the probing task after cyclek. For each
model, each point in Figure 2 corresponds to
100× AUCk −AUC 1
AUC1
= 100×
AUCk
AUC1
−1

(1)
The ratioAUC k/AUC1 measures the relative change in
probing AUC after cyclekwith respect to the first cycle, while
subtracting one centers the first-cycle performance at zero.
Multiplying by 100 expresses this change as a percentage.
Thus, positive values indicate higher AUC than in the first
cycle, corresponding to worse probing performance, whereas
negative values indicate lower AUC and improved probing
performance.
All the models show evidence of plasticity loss on the
probing task. Models up to 314M parameters eventually show
an increasing trend in AUC as the number of cycles increases.
Moreover, the onset of this trend occurs earlier in smaller
models. For example, the 5M and 12M models show an
increasing trend in AUC immediately after the first cycle,
whereas the 83M model shows an increasing trend only after
the seventh cycle. The results also show that beneficial transfer
is more pronounced in larger models: the 53M model achieves
a 0.5% reduction in AUC over time, whereas the 314M model
achieves more than a 1.5% reduction.
We conclude from these results that pre-norm GPT-style
Transformer models can lose plasticity when trained on the
Multilingual Continual Learning Problem. However, for a
fixed training duration, the effect of plasticity loss diminishes
with model size: it is more severe in the 5M model than in the
314M model. Moreover, while continual pretraining initially
4
===== [PAGE 5] =====
-1.0 %
-0.5 %
0.0 %
0.5 %
1.0 %
0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48
-1.5 %
106M
83M
39M
27M
53M
314M
5M
12M
Cycle
% change in AUC relative to first cycle
Fig. 2: Percentage change in validation-loss AUC on the probing task relative to the first cycle for models ranging from 5M to
314M non-embedding parameters from the second to 48th cycle. All the models eventually exhibit an increasing trend in AUC,
indicating a reduced ability to learn the probing task and providing evidence of plasticity loss. However for larger models we
observe plasticity loss to occur after considerably more cycles.
improves performance on the probing language, excessive
continual pretraining eventually has a detrimental effect.
This observation motivates our next research question:is it
possible to predict the onset of plasticity loss based on the
size of the model?; i.e., is it possible to derive ascaling law
for the onset of the loss of plasticity.
To predict the onset of plasticity loss, we first identified
the task after which continual pretraining began to have a
detrimental effect on probing performance. In other words,
we estimated the minimum of each curve in Figure 2. Since
we probed only once per cycle in the experiments above,
we lacked the granularity to precisely identify the task after
which the trend began to increase, resulting in multiple models
sharing the same minimum. Consequently, we performed
additional probing tasks within each cycle.
This higher-frequency probing introduced another issue:
each language has a different level of transfer to Vietnamese,
which adds noise to the evaluations. For example, pretraining
on English consistently resulted in better downstream perfor-
mance on Vietnamese than pretraining on any other language,
whereas pretraining on Japanese consistently resulted in worse
performance. These discrepancies due to different levels of
transfer often obscured the relatively small effect of plasticity
loss. To reduce noise due to different levels of transfer, we
probed only after languages with levels of transfer to Viet-
namese similar to Russian: Chinese and German. We explain
in more detail how we chose these languages in Appendix B.
After increasing the probing frequency within each cycle, we
further smoothed each curve using a moving average with a
window size of three probe measurements. For each model,
we identified the minimum of the smoothed curve and used
this point as an estimate of the onset of plasticity loss.
From this data, we then fit a log-log model relating the
estimated onset to model size, resulting in the power law
T= 1.3×10 −5 ·P 0.8269 (2)
whereTdenotes the task-instance number at which we expect
to observe measurable effects of plasticity loss andPdenotes
the number of non-embedding parameters in the model. In
Figure 3, we show the fitted line along with the observed
data. In Appendix B, we report fits for linear, log-linear, and
exponential models. All three alternatives produced higher root
mean-squared error than the log-log model under leave-one-
out cross-validation, providing some evidence that a power-law
fit is most natural.
The log-log model has an important implication for address-
ing plasticity loss solely through model scaling. Equation 2
predicts that the number of task instances needed to observe
plasticity loss scales sublinearly with the number of parame-
ters. Consequently, increasing model size to prevent plasticity
loss has diminishing returns and may be an inefficient ap-
proach to addressing the problem.
This scaling relationship also provides a useful point of
comparison with recent results on larger language models.
Springer et al. (2025) provided evidence that the effects
of plasticity loss may already be observable in one-billion-
parameter models, finding that these models had lower fine-
tuning performance after pretraining for longer than 2 trillion
tokens. Extrapolating our log-log model to this scale predicts
that a model with one billion non-embedding parameters
would show signs of plasticity loss after 360 task instances, or
1.8 trillion training tokens, since each task instance consists of
5 billion tokens. Furthermore, they reported no consistent ev-
idence of plasticity loss after training seven-billion-parameter
5
===== [PAGE 6] =====
107 108
5M 12M
27M
39M
106M
53M 83M
314M
Observed
Fitted Line
101
102
Model size
Onset of plasticity loss (task-instance number)
Fig. 3: Log-log model predicting the onset of plasticity loss,
measured in number of task instances, as a function of model
size. The onset of plasticity loss scales asT= 1.3×10 −5 ·
P 0.8269, wherePis the number of non-embedding parameters.
We observe a qualitatively decent but not perfect fit with
several arguable outliers at 12M and 53M.
models for 2 trillion tokens. This is also consistent with our
extrapolation, which predicts that a model of that size would
show evidence of plasticity loss after approximately 9 trillion
training tokens.
Although these extrapolations are consistent with the over-
training results reported by Springer et al. (2025), the learning
problems are substantially different. Springer et al. (2025)
evaluated models pretrained on stationary datasets, whereas
our results so far are based on a non-stationary learning
problem with abrupt task changes. This comparison motivates
our next question:does plasticity loss also emerge under
stationary training?
B. Plasticity Loss Under Stationary Training and Network-
Level Correlates
To investigate this question, we trained the 5M, 12M, and
27M models on a stationary mixture of all eight training
languages, which we refer to as the Multilingual Stationary
Learning Problem. After every 5 billion training tokens, we
performed a probing task by training a copy of the current
model checkpoint on Vietnamese for 5 billion tokens and
measuring the AUC of the validation loss. As in the continual
setting, the parameter updates from probing were discarded.
We used the same hyperparameters as in the Multilingual
Continual Learning Problem, including the number of warm-
up steps for the learning rate.
The results in the Multilingual Stationary Learning Problem
show a pattern similar to that observed in the continual
learning setting. Figure 4 shows the percentage change in AUC
relative to the first probing task. All three models eventually
show an increasing trend in AUC, indicating a decrease in the
5M
12M
0.0 %
-0.2 %
-0.4 %
-0.6 %
-0.8 %
-1.0 %
0.2 %
0.4 %
0 B 100 B 200 B 400 B 300 B 500 B
27M
Training tokens
% change in AUC
Fig. 4: Percentage change in validation-loss AUC on the
probing task relative to the first probing task during training on
the Multilingual Stationary Learning Problem. As the number
of training tokens increases, the AUC of all three models
eventually increases, indicating a reduced ability to learn from
new information as training progresses.
ability to learn from new data. Moreover, the onset of plasticity
loss is, once again, delayed with model size: the 5M model
shows plasticity loss sooner than the 27M model. However, the
rate at which the models lose plasticity appears to be different.
This is most evident in the 27M model, which crosses the zero
line after 475B tokens of training in the stationary setting and
after 320B tokens in the continual setting. Nevertheless, these
results suggest that models trained on stationary data are not
exempt from plasticity loss and thus plasticity loss is unlikely
to be explained solely by abrupt task changes common in
continual learning problems.
Having observed plasticity loss in both continual and sta-
tionary learning problems, the next natural question is:what
factors are associated with this phenomenon?The causes
of plasticity loss have been widely debated, and there is
currently no clear consensus in the literature (Lyle et al., 2023;
Lewandowski et al., 2024). Fully characterizing the correlates
or causes of plasticity loss is beyond the scope of this paper.
Nevertheless, we measure several correlates of plasticity loss
that may provide insight into the changes occurring inside
the network as its ability to learn deteriorates. Understanding
these correlates may also suggest approaches for mitigating
plasticity loss.
In this section, we focus on models with 12M, 53M, and
106M non-embedding parameters trained on the Multilingual
Continual Learning Problem. Additional measurements for
other model sizes are included in Appendix C.
We recorded metrics previously observed to correlate with
plasticity loss. First, we measured the average absolute mag-
nitude of the model parameters, excluding embedding layers.
The average is computed over all non-embedding parameters
in the network, including both weights and biases; it is
not computed separately per layer before averaging. Average
parameter magnitude has repeatedly been observed to correlate
with plasticity loss (Kumar et al., 2024; Dohare et al., 2024;
Hernandez-Garcia et al., 2025), making it a useful diagnos-
tic for the deterioration in probing performance observed
in Figure 2. The top row of Figure 5 shows the average
6
===== [PAGE 7] =====
parameter magnitude measured at the end of each cycle for
the 12M, 53M, and 106M models. The red marker in each
plot corresponds to the cycle after which the model’s probing
performance began to deteriorate.
We found that average parameter magnitude tended to in-
crease with the number of cycles. However, this pattern did not
consistently track the observed deterioration in probing perfor-
mance. For example, although the 106M model starts showing
deterioration in performance on the eighth cycle (Figure 5c,
top row), its average parameter magnitude decreases steadily
between the eighth and twentieth cycles. Conversely, for the
53M model, probing performance improves between the first
and seventh cycles, even though average parameter magnitude
steadily increases during the same period (Figure 5b, top row).
Thus, it appears that the average parameter magnitude alone
does not fully account for the plasticity loss observed in these
models.
To further investigate correlates of plasticity loss, we mea-
sured the percentage of dormant units in the network’s MLP
layers. We follow the definition of dormant units from Sokar
et al. (2023), adapting it to the sequence-modeling setting. Let
hl
i(x, j)denote the activation of MLP unitiin layerlat token
positionjfor sequencex. Given a datasetDof sequences of
lengthm, let the average absolute activation of this unit be
¯hl
i = 1
|D| ·m
X
x∈D
mX
j=1
hl
i(x, j)
 (3)
We then define the normalized absolute activation as
sl
i =
¯hl
i
1
N l
PN l
k=1
¯hl
k
(4)
whereN l is the number of units in layerl. A unitiin layer
lis said to beϵ-dormant ifs l
i ≤ϵ, for some small positive
thresholdϵ. A high fraction of dormant units suggests that
a large portion of the layer has low activity relative to other
units in the same layer. In networks with smooth activations
such as GeLU, dormancy should not be interpreted as exact
inactivity, but rather as a diagnostic indicating that some units
contribute comparatively little to the layer’s representation.
In our experiments, we measured the percentage of dormant
units in the network at the end of each cycle. We measured
average absolute activations on 256 sequences of length 2,048
sampled from the Vietnamese validation dataset, which the
model had not observed during continual pretraining. We set
the threshold toϵ= 0.01. The bottom row of Figure 5 shows
the results for the 12M, 53M, and 106M models.
In the 53M and 106M models, we observed an increasing
trend in the percentage of dormant units in the network. These
dormant units were not evenly distributed across layers. In
the 53M model, more than 95% of the units in the eighth
layer were dormant (Figure 6a). Similarly, in the 106M model,
nearly 80% of the units in the tenth layer were dormant
(Figure 6b). Nevertheless, dormant units alone cannot fully
explain plasticity loss, since we did not observe an increasing
percentage of dormant units in the 12M model (bottom row
of Figure 5a) from cycle 5 onward, even though this model
exhibited the most severe plasticity loss and the performance
continued to deteriorate after cycle 5.
Having observed increasing dormancy in MLP layers over
the course of training, we turned our attention to the attention
layers. Specifically, we measured the entropy of attention
heads in the network. For a single query position, letp∈R s
denote the normalized attention weights overskeys. The
entropy of this attention distribution is defined as
Entropy(p) =−
sX
i=1
pi log(pi).
In attention heads, entropy measures how attention is dis-
tributed across elements in the sequence. High entropy cor-
responds to a diffuse distribution of attention weights, as-
signing nearly equal weight to many elements. High-entropy
attention can indicate underutilized attention heads, which
may be detrimental to model performance (Sanyal et al.,
2026). Intuitively, when attention is nearly uniform over a
long sequence, the head primarily averages information across
many positions, limiting its ability to provide query-specific
information. Conversely, low entropy indicates that attention
is concentrated on a small number of elements in the sequence.
This phenomenon, known as entropy collapse, has been linked
to training instabilities in Transformer architectures (Zhai
et al., 2023). One possible contributor to low-entropy attention
is the emergence of attention sinks (Xiao et al., 2024b; Gu
et al., 2025), in which certain tokens, often special tokens such
as theBOStoken, receive a disproportionately large amount
of attention mass.
We measured the entropy of attention heads at the end of
each cycle using the Russian-language validation dataset. For
each cycle, we sampled 512 sequences of length 2,048 and
computed the attention distribution for query positions 256
through 2,048. We then computed the entropy of each attention
distribution and averaged across sequences and query positions
to obtain the average entropy per head, per layer, and per cycle.
The maximum achievable average entropy over these query
positions is
Hmax = 1
1793
2048X
k=256
ln(k)≈6.9215(5)
We categorized heads aslazyif their average entropy was
above 9
10 ·H max, indicating attention patterns that are close to
uniform across most available context positions. Conversely,
we categorized heads ascollapsedif their average entropy was
below 1
10 ·H max, indicating attention patterns concentrated on
very few positions.
We report the percentage of lazy and collapsed heads per
cycle for the 12M, 53M, and 106M models in Figure 7.
The red markers correspond to the cycle after which probing
performance started to deteriorate. As before, the percentage
of lazy or collapsed heads does not perfectly correlate with
plasticity loss. For instance, in the 53M model, the percentage
of collapsed heads increases with the number of cycles (top
7
===== [PAGE 8] =====
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
2%
4%
6%
8%
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
0.0500
0.0505
0.0510
0.0515
a
 12M Model
Percentage of Dormant Units Average Weight Magnitude
53M Modelb
Cycle
355 20 10 25 15 30 40 45
0.02658
0.02662
0.02666
0.02670
106M Modelc
Cycle
355 20 10 25 15 30 40 45
10 %
8 %
6 %
4 %
2 %
0 %
0.0334
0.0338
0.0342
Cycle
24124 168 20 28 32
Cycle
24124 168 20 28 32
20 %
15 %
10 %
5 %
0 %
Fig. 5: Average parameter magnitude and percentage of dormant units for the (a) 12M model, (b) 53M model, and (c) 106M
model trained on the Multilingual Continual Learning Problem. As the number of cycles increases, average parameter magnitude
and the percentage of dormant units tend to increase across most models. However, these trends do not consistently track the
deterioration in probing performance due to plasticity loss. The red marker indicates the cycle after which the model’s probing
performance began to deteriorate.
a 53M Model
Cycle
4 8 12 24 28 32 3616 20
0 %
20 %
40 %
60 %
80 %
100 %Percentage of Dormant Units
Layer
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
b
Percentage of Dormant Units
Cycle
0 6 12 18 30 36 42 4824
0 %
20 %
40 %
60 %
80 %
106M Model
Layer
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Fig. 6: Percentage of dormant units per layer in the (a) 53M
and (b) 106M models trained on the Multilingual Continual
Learning Problem. In both models, one layer accumulates a
disproportionately large fraction of dormant units, suggesting
that many units in that layer have low activity relative to other
units in the same layer.
row of Figure 7b), whereas it decreases for the 106M model
(top row of Figure 7c). For the 106M model, the increase in
the percentage of lazy heads precedes the onset of plasticity
loss (bottom row of Figure 7c), whereas in the 12M model the
increase occurs after the onset of plasticity loss (bottom row
of Figure 7a). In one case, the percentage of collapsed heads
follows the opposite trend from the deterioration in probing
performance (top row of Figure 7c).
Neither the percentage of collapsed heads nor the percentage
of lazy heads fully explains plasticity loss. Nevertheless, these
metrics point to pathological changes occurring inside the
network. In some cases, they reveal layer-wide changes in
attention behavior. In the 12M model, the first layer increas-
ingly collapses as the number of cycles increases (Figure 7d).
In the 53M model, the ninth layer collapses for several cycles,
though it later recovers (Figure 7e). Lastly, the eleventh layer
of the 106M model becomes lazy after the first few cycles
(Figure 7f). These examples suggest that entire attention layers
can enter regimes in which their attention patterns become ei-
ther overly concentrated or overly diffuse, potentially reducing
their contribution to the model’s performance.
Although the main text focuses on three model sizes, the
additional measurements reported in Appendix C show a
similar qualitative picture. None of the three metrics perfectly
tracks the onset or severity of plasticity loss across all models.
However, taken together, they suggest that continued training
changes the networks in ways consistent with reduced effective
capacity and slower adaptation. In the MLP layers, this appears
as an accumulation of low-activity units. In the attention
layers, it appears as an increase in heads whose attention
patterns become either overly diffuse or overly concentrated.
In parallel, average parameter magnitude tends to increase,
which, in the presence of layer normalization, may contribute
to slower learning, as pointed out by Lyle et al. (2024a).
Together, these effects may contribute to the reduced ability
to learn from new data.
8
===== [PAGE 9] =====
106M Modelc
a 12M Model
Percentage of Collapsed Heads
10 %
15 %
20 %
25 %
30 %
35 %
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Percentage of Lazy Heads
0 %
2 %
4 %
6 %
8 %
10 %
12 %
14 %
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Cycle
0 10 20 40 30
0 %
10 %
20 %
30 %
Cycle
0 10 20 40 30
20 %
30 %
40 %
53M Modelb
Cycle
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
10 %
0 %
20 %
30 %
10 %
20 %
30 %
Cycle
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Average Entropy
12M Model: Layer 1d
Lazy Head Threshold (6.2294 Nats)
Collapsed Threshold (0.6922 Nats)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Cycle
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Collapsed Threshold
Lazy Head Threshold
53M Model: Layer 9e
Cycle
10 20 4030 45352515 5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
106M Model: Layer 11
Collapsed Threshold
Lazy Head Threshold
f
Fig. 7: Top panels: Percentage of collapsed and lazy attention heads for the (a) 12M model, (b) 53M model, and (c) 106M
model trained on the Multilingual Continual Learning Problem. Bottom panels: entropy of attention heads for (d) the first
layer of the 12M model, (e) the ninth layer of the 53M model, and (f) the eleventh layer of the 106M model. Neither the
percentage of collapsed heads nor the percentage of lazy heads fully explains plasticity loss. Nevertheless, these metrics reveal
pathological changes in the attention layers. In extreme cases, entire layers collapse or become lazy.
This account is necessarily partial. Our measurements are
correlational and do not provide a mechanistic explanation
for why low-activity units, lazy attention heads, collapsed
attention heads, or increased parameter magnitude emerge over
training. Nevertheless, these diagnostics suggest possible di-
rections for designing learning systems that maintain plasticity
over longer training horizons.
One simple approach is to limit parameter growth. In
our experiments, we used a weight decay of 0.1, a value
commonly used in language-model training. However, recent
work by Han et al. (2026) has shown that higher values of
weight decay can improve model plasticity despite resulting in
higher pretraining loss. Relatedly, previous work has suggested
clipping parameter values near zero as an effective way to
prevent plasticity loss (Elsayed et al., 2024). Both approaches
directly target the increase in average parameter magnitude
observed in the top row of Figure 5.
A second approach is to mitigate potential capacity loss
caused by the accumulation of dormant units. For example,
Continual Backpropagation measures the activity of units
and periodically reinitializes units with low average activ-
ity (Dohare et al., 2021, 2024). Other algorithms, such as
ReDo (Sokar et al., 2023), Self-Normalized Resets (Farias &
Jozefiak, 2025), and GraMa (Liu et al., 2026), also reinitialize
neurons but use different criteria for selecting which units to
reset. Alternatively, one can design activation functions that
are less prone to producing dormant units (Abbas et al., 2023;
Lillo & Cheney, 2026).
The increase in lazy or collapsed attention heads has not
been directly studied in the plasticity-loss literature. Nev-
ertheless, existing methods suggest possible interventions.
Shrink-and-Perturb (Ash & Adams, 2020) and Utility-based
Perturbed Gradient Descent (Elsayed & Mahmood, 2024), for
example, add noise to network parameters and may help move
attention heads out of overly diffuse or overly concentrated
regimes. Similarly, Selective Weight Reinitialization operates
directly on the network’s weights rather than on individual
units (Hernandez-Garcia et al., 2025), and may help counter-
act the accumulation of pathological attention patterns. For
overly diffuse attention, previous work has proposed adding
learnable tokens that act as attention sinks, collecting attention
mass without affecting the predictions of real sequence ele-
ments (Xiao et al., 2024a; Darcet et al., 2024). Whether these
methods can prevent the attention-pathology patterns observed
here remains an open empirical question.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied loss of plasticity in GPT-style
Transformer models trained on natural-language data. Whereas
previous studies of plasticity loss have largely focused on
smaller models, synthetic problems, or non-language domains,
our results show that GPT-style models with more than 100
9
===== [PAGE 10] =====
million non-embedding parameters can lose the ability to
efficiently adapt to new data even when trained on real, large-
scale natural-language datasets.
Beyond demonstrating plasticity loss in this setting, we
are the first to fit a model predicting the onset of plasticity
loss as a function of model size. To make this comparison
more controlled, we kept the aspect ratio and attention-head
dimension fixed across model sizes, reducing architectural
variation beyond scale. The resulting model is a classical
power-law ‘scaling-law’ between the number of parameters
and the number of tokens until the onset of plasticity loss.
Our law predicts that plasticity loss scales sublinearly with the
number of non-embedding parameters, implying diminishing
returns from increasing model size alone as a strategy for pre-
venting plasticity loss. This prediction speaks to the question
posed in the title of this paper: scale alone cannot save us from
plasticity loss.
Our result is even more striking given that we also observed
evidence of plasticity loss under stationary multilingual train-
ing. This means that plasticity loss is not simply caused by
our original, somewhat artificially nonstationary task where we
cycle through languages. Rather, plasticity loss also seems to
affect models which have undergone regular pretraining for a
long period on a stationary dataset. Overall, then, we can ten-
tatively conclude that scaling will delay plasticity loss, often
for a substantial number of tokens, but cannot fully defeat it,
and secondly that we should expect plasticity loss to eventually
affect standard language models which have been trained using
standard methods. This implies that loss of plasticity is not an
artifact of small networks, outdated architectures, or unusual
training setups, but rather a fundamental and extremely general
property of neural network training.
Lastly, we measured several correlates of plasticity loss
inside the network. As models lost plasticity, they tended
to accumulate low-activity MLP units, lazy attention heads,
collapsed attention heads, and larger parameter magnitudes.
These effects did not appear uniformly across all models, and
none of them alone fully explains the observed deterioration in
probing performance. Nevertheless, they provide useful diag-
nostics and suggest possible directions for mitigation, ranging
from stronger constraints on parameter growth to methods that
track unit activity or reinitialize underused components. We
hope these results help guide the design of learning systems
that maintain plasticity over long training horizons in both
stationary and continual learning settings.
REFERENCES
Zaheer Abbas, Rosie Zhao, Joseph Modayil, Adam White,
and Marlos C. Machado. Loss of plasticity in continual
deep reinforcement learning. In2nd Conference on Lifelong
Learning Agents, 2023.
David Abel, Michael Bowling, Andre Barreto, Will Dabney,
Shi Dong, Steven Stenberg Hansen, Anna Harutyunyan,
Khimya Khetarpal, Clare Lyle, Razvan Pascanu, Georgios
Piliouras, Doina Precup, Jonathan Richens, Mark Rowland,
Tom Schaul, and Satinder Singh. Plasticity as the mirror
of empowerment. InThe Thirty-ninth Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=eOZFqyE9Ok.
Kavosh Asadi, Rasool Fakoor, and Shoham Sabach. Reset-
ting the optimizer in deep RL: An empirical study. In
Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
AnFUgNC3Yc.
Jordan Ash and Ryan P Adams. On warm-starting neural
network training. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 33, pp. 3884–3894, 2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah,
Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Lan-
guage models are few-shot learners.Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2020.
Dongkyu Cho, Taesup Moon, Rumi Chunara, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Sungmin Cha. Forget forgetting: Continual learning in a
world of abundant memory. InThe F ourteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=fvL8IIEPxG.
Wesley Chung, Lynn Cherif, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
Parseval regularization for continual reinforcement learning.
InThe Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=RB1F2h5YEx.
Timothée Darcet, Maxime Oquab, Julien Mairal, and Pi-
otr Bojanowski. Vision transformers need registers. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
2dnO3LLiJ1.
DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan
Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi
Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo,
Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun
Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen,
Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng
Wang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo
Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong
Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang
Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song,
Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang,
Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia,
Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun
Wang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang,
Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng
Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi
Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe
Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen,
S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen,
Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma,
Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou,
Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L.
Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei An, Wen Liu,
Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang,
X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong
10
===== [PAGE 11] =====
Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xi-
aokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun,
Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao
Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou,
Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, Y . K.
Li, Y . Q. Wang, Y . X. Wei, Y . X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yanhong
Xu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao,
Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng,
Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Ying
Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma,
Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu,
Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun
Zha, Yunfan Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo,
Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z.
Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhen
Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen
Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong
Shao, Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li,
Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang
Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng Pan. Deepseek-v3 technical
report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437.
Shibhansh Dohare, Richard S Sutton, and A Rupam Mahmood.
Continual Backprop: Stochastic gradient descent with per-
sistent randomness, 2021. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2108.06325.
Shibhansh Dohare, J Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Parash Rah-
man, A Rupam Mahmood, and Richard S Sutton. Maintain-
ing plasticity in deep continual learning, 2023. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.13812.
Shibhansh Dohare, J Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Qingfeng
Lan, Parash Rahman, A Rupam Mahmood, and Richard S
Sutton. Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning.Nature,
632(8026):768–774, 2024.
Andrew W Ellis and Matthew A Lambon Ralph. Age of
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect loss of
plasticity in maturing systems: insights from connectionist
networks.Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
memory, and cognition, 26(5):1103, 2000.
Mohamed Elsayed and A. Rupam Mahmood. Addressing
loss of plasticity and catastrophic forgetting in continual
learning. In12th International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=sKPzAXoylB.
Mohamed Elsayed, Qingfeng Lan, Clare Lyle, and A. Rupam
Mahmood. Weight clipping for deep continual and rein-
forcement learning.RLJ, 5:2198–2217, 2024.
Vivek Farias and Adam Daniel Jozefiak. Self-normalized re-
sets for plasticity in continual learning. InThe Thirteenth In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=G82uQztzxl.
Robert M. French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist
networks.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(4):128–135,
1999. ISSN 1364-6613.
Xiangming Gu, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Qian Liu, Fengzhuo
Zhang, Cunxiao Du, Ye Wang, and Min Lin. When atten-
tion sink emerges in language models: An empirical view.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations,
2025.
Tessa Han, Sebastian Bordt, Hanlin Zhang, and Sham Kakade.
Weight decay improves language model plasticity. In
Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML ’26, New York, NY , USA, 2026.
Association for Computing Machinery.
J. Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Shibhansh Dohare, Jun Luo,
and Richard S. Sutton. Reinitializing weights vs units for
maintaining plasticity in neural networks. In4th Conference
on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2025.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel
Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran
Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-
Barwinska, et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks.Proceedings of the national academy of
sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Saurabh Kumar, Henrik Marklund, and Benjamin Van Roy.
Maintaining plasticity in continual learning via regenerative
regularization. In3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning
Agents, 2024.
Hojoon Lee, Hanseul Cho, Hyunseung Kim, Daehoon Gwak,
Joonkee Kim, Jaegul Choo, Se-Young Yun, and Chulhee
Yun. Plastic: Improving input and label plasticity for
sample efficient reinforcement learning.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36:62270–62295, 2023.
Hojoon Lee, Hyeonseo Cho, Hyunseung Kim, Donghu Kim,
Dugki Min, Jaegul Choo, and Clare Lyle. Slow and steady
wins the race: Maintaining plasticity with hare and tortoise
networks. In41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2024.
Alex Lewandowski, Haruto Tanaka, Dale Schuurmans, and
Marlos C. Machado. Curvature explains loss of plasticity,
2024. Preprint available at https://openreview.net/forum?id=
SkF7NZGVr5.
Alex Lewandowski, Michał Bortkiewicz, Saurabh Kumar, An-
drás György, Dale Schuurmans, Mateusz Ostaszewski, and
Marlos C. Machado. Learning continually by spectral reg-
ularization. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Hcb2cgPbMg.
Lute Lillo and Nick Cheney. Activation function design sus-
tains plasticity in continual learning. InThe F ourteenth In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XZf6wObHX4.
Jiashun Liu, Zihao Wu, Johan Obando-Ceron, Pablo Samuel
Castro, Aaron Courville, and Ling Pan. Measure gradients,
not activations! enhancing neuronal activity in deep rein-
forcement learning. InThe Thirty-ninth Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=FjNHmO39pp.
Tianhui Liu and Lili Mou. Do neural networks lose plasticity
in a gradually changing world?, 2026. Preprint available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.09234.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay
regularization. InInternational Conference on Learning
11
===== [PAGE 12] =====
Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
Clare Lyle, Mark Rowland, and Will Dabney. Understanding
and preventing capacity loss in reinforcement learning. In
10th International Conference on Learning Representations,
2022.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo
Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney. Under-
standing plasticity in neural networks. In Andreas Krause,
Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt,
Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.),Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 202 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pp. 23190–23211. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v202/lyle23b.html.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Khimya Khetarpal, James Martens,
Hado van Hasselt, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
Normalization and effective learning rates in reinforcement
learning, 2024a. Preprint available at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2407.01800.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Khimya Khetarpal, Hado van Hasselt,
Razvan Pascanu, James Martens, and Will Dabney. Disen-
tangling the causes of plasticity loss in neural networks. In
3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2024b.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic inter-
ference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning
problem.Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 24:109–
165, 1989.
Martial Mermillod, Aurélia Bugaiska, and Patrick Bonin. The
stability-plasticity dilemma: Investigating the continuum
from catastrophic forgetting to age-limited learning effects,
2013.
Thuat Nguyen, Chien Van Nguyen, Viet Dac Lai, Hieu Man,
Nghia Trung Ngo, Franck Dernoncourt, Ryan A. Rossi,
and Thien Huu Nguyen. CulturaX: A cleaned, enormous,
and multilingual dataset for large language models in 167
languages. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique
Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen
Xue (eds.),Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pp. 4226–
4237, Torino, Italia, May 2024. ELRA and ICCL. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.377.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc
Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The primacy bias in deep
reinforcement learning. In39th International Conference
on Machine Learning, pp. 16828–16847, 2022.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans,
Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
understanding by generative pre-training, 2018. Preprint
available at https://cdn.openai.com/research-covers/
language-unsupervised/language_understanding_paper.pdf.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario
Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models are unsuper-
vised multitask learners. Technical report, OpenAI, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee,
Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with
a unified text-to-text transformer.J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21
(1), January 2020. ISSN 1532-4435.
Sunny Sanyal, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Alex Dimakis, and sujay
sanghavi. When attention collapses: How degenerate layers
in LLMs enable smaller, stronger models.Transactions on
Machine Learning Research, 2026. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=2zQn0bUoPf.
Mark Smith, Garrison Cottrell, and Karen Anderson. The
early word catches the weights. In T. Leen, T. Diet-
terich, and V . Tresp (eds.),Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 13. MIT Press, 2000.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2000/
file/90599c8fdd2f6e7a03ad173e2f535751-Paper.pdf.
Ghada Sokar, Rishabh Agarwal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and
Utku Evci. The dormant neuron phenomenon in deep
reinforcement learning. In40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, pp. 32145–32168, 2023.
Jacob Mitchell Springer, Sachin Goyal, Kaiyue Wen, Tanishq
Kumar, Xiang Yue, Sadhika Malladi, Graham Neubig, and
Aditi Raghunathan. Overtrained language models are harder
to fine-tune. InF orty-second International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=YW6edSufht.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit,
Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Liyuan Wang, Xingxing Zhang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu.
A comprehensive survey of continual learning: Theory,
method and application.IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 46(8):5362–5383, 2024.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3367329.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han,
and Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming language models with
attention sinks. InThe Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024a. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=NG7sS51zVF.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and
Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming language models with
attention sinks. InInternational Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024b.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan
Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang,
Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. Preprint
available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.
Shuangfei Zhai, Tatiana Likhomanenko, Etai Littwin, Dan
Busbridge, Jason Ramapuram, Yizhe Zhang, Jiatao Gu,
and Josh Susskind. Stabilizing transformer training by
preventing attention entropy collapse. InProceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.
12
===== [PAGE 13] =====
APPENDIXA
FURTHERDETAILS ONPARAMETERCOUNTS,
ARCHITECTURALCHOICES,ANDHYPERPARAMETER
SELECTION
Table I reports the architectural configurations and param-
eter counts for the models used in our experiments. Across
model sizes, we kept the aspect ratiod/L, wheredis the
hidden dimension andLis the number of layers, as close
to 80 as possible. We also fixed the attention-head dimension,
d/Heads, to 64 for all models. The name of each model refers
to the number of non-embedding parameters.
Figure 8 shows the specific Transformer architecture used
in our study of plasticity loss. Notably, the architecture uses
absolute positional encoding with tied embeddings, layer nor-
malization before the attention and feedforward blocks (pre-
norm), and GeLU activations.
The learning rate,η, was tuned for the 5M and 314M models
using a grid search over final validation loss after 5 billion
tokens of training on English. We tested values of
η∈

1×10 −4,3×10 −4,5×10 −4,8×10 −4,(6)
1×10 −3,3×10 −3,5×10 −3	
(7)
The best learning rates were3×10 −3 for the 5M model and
1×10 −3 for the 314M model. We then interpolated learning
rates for the intermediate-size models by modeling the learning
rate as a power law in the hidden dimension, similar in spirit
to the scaling rule used inµP:
η314M =η 5M
 d5M
d314M
α
,
α= log(η314M/η5M)
log(d5M/d314M) = log(1/3)
log(1/4) ≈0.79248.
We verified that this interpolation was sensible by com-
paring the interpolated learning rates with additional grid-
search results for the 12M, 27M, 53M, and 106M models. In
every case, the interpolated learning rate yielded a lower final
validation loss on English than the other grid-search values
tested. The learning rates obtained from this interpolation,
together with the grid-search results for each model, are listed
in Table II.
APPENDIXB
FINDING THEMINIMUM OF THEPLASTICITYLOSSCURVE
ANDCREATING APREDICTIVEMODEL
To create the predictive model presented in the main text,
we first identified, for each model, the task after which
the trend in Figure 2 began to increase. Initially, we only
probed after Russian, the last language in the cycle. This
approach was ideal for demonstrating plasticity loss because
any deterioration in performance could be attributed solely
to a loss of learning ability. However, this probing approach
provided a coarse level of granularity, preventing us from
more precisely determining the start of the increasing trend
in performance.
Input
Max Sequence Length = 2,048
Embeddings
Token Embedding
151,680 x hidden dimension
Absolute Positional Embedding
2,048 x hidden dimension+
Final Layer Norm
scale parameter: hidden dimension
bias term: hidden dimension
Tied Token Embedding
hidden dimension x 151,680
Output
Vocabulary Size: 151,680
x Number of Layers
Transformer Block 
Layer Norm
scale parameter: hidden dimension
bias term: hidden dimension
Multi-Head Self-Attention
QKV Projection: 3 x hidden dimension x 64 x number of heads
QKV Bias: 3 x 64 x number of heads
Output Projection: 64 x number of heads x hidden dimension
Output Bias: hidden dimension 
Feedforward Block: GeLU Activations
Input Projection: hidden dimension x 4 x hidden dimension
Input Bias: 4 x hidden dimension
Output Projection: 4 x hidden dimension x hidden dimension
Output Bias: hidden dimension 
Layer Norm
scale parameter: hidden dimension
bias term: hidden dimension
Fig. 8: Diagram of the specific Transformer architecture used
in our experiments.
To increase the granularity in our probing, we decided
to perform more probing tasks within each cycle. However,
probing after each language resulted in noisy data because
performance on Vietnamese was heavily influenced by the
preceding language. To illustrate this, we show in Table III
the AUC of the validation loss on the Vietnamese language
after pretraining, individually, on each of the eight different
languages in the cycle. We found that some languages con-
sistently resulted in better transfer than others. For example,
pretraining on English consistently resulted in the lowest AUC
across the 5M, 12M, and 27M models. On the other hand,
pretraining on Japanese consistently resulted in higher AUC
than the average across languages.
To reduce noise from the pretraining language preceding
13
===== [PAGE 14] =====
Model Layers Hidden Attn.d/L d/HeadsEff. Params Total Params
LDim.dHeads
5M 4 320 5 80.0 64 4,932,480 54,125,440
12M 5 448 7 89.6 64 12,072,256 80,942,400
27M 7 576 9 82.3 64 27,922,752 116,470,080
39M 8 640 10 80.0 64 39,389,440 137,775,360
53M 9 704 11 78.2 64 53,610,304 161,834,816
83M 10 832 13 83.2 64 83,176,704 211,078,400
106M 11 896 14 81.5 64 106,101,632 243,841,920
314M 16 1280 20 80.0 64 314,841,600 511,613,440
TABLE I: Model configurations used in our experiments. All models use an attention-head dimension,d/Heads, of 64. The
aspect ratio,d/L, was kept as close to 80 as possible. Eff. Params excludes embedding layers, whereas Total Params includes
all parameters in the network.
ModeldInterpolation Grid Search
η×10 3 Lossη×10 3 Loss
5M 320 3.00 3.9941 3.00 3.9941
12M 448 2.30 3.7973 3.00 3.8088
27M 576 1.88 3.6303 1.00 3.6394
39M 640 1.73 3.5767 – –
53M 704 1.61 3.5100 1.00 3.5130
83M 832 1.41 3.4436 – –
106M 896 1.33 3.4006 1.00 3.4037
314M 1280 1.00 3.2575 1.00 3.2575
TABLE II: Learning rates per model size, scaled asη=η 5M ·
(d5M/d)0.79248. The loss column was computed by averaging
the last 10 validation-loss measurements. Each validation-loss
measurement was computed using 2.5 million tokens.
probing, we selected languages with similar levels of transfer.
Thus, we selected Chinese, German, and Russian for extended
probing, corresponding to the second, sixth, and eighth lan-
guage in a cycle, respectively. We also considered including
Japanese, but the difference in transfer between Japanese and
German once again introduced too much noise.
After extensive probing, we normalized the AUC line by
dividing it by the area under the validation loss curve when
training on Vietnamese alone. The blue lines in the plots in
Figure 9 correspond to the change in AUC relative to training
on Vietnamese alone, i.e., the change in AUC due to continual
pretraining. Note that we only extended probing in cycles near
the minimum of the line to minimize computational cost.
To further account for the effect of the pretraining language
immediately before probing, we computed a moving average
with a window size of three. Lastly, we used the minimum
point of the moving average line as the onset of plasticity
loss. The yellow lines in the plots in Figure 9 correspond to
the moving average line with a point indicating the minimum
point. Table IV shows the task after which the trend in
AUC increased—the onset of plasticity loss—along with the
parameter count of the model.
We used the data in Table IV to fit four models for
predicting the onset of plasticity loss, each encoding a different
Pretraining
Language
AUC on Vietnamese Language
5M Model 12M Model 27M Model
English 3.0288 2.8189 2.6496
Chinese 3.0634 2.8602 2.6925
French 3.0498 2.8440 2.6718
Japanese 3.0661 2.8746 2.7019
Spanish 3.0502 2.8423 2.6710
German 3.0560 2.8519 2.6842
Portuguese 3.0562 2.8506 2.6712
Russian 3.0793 2.8641 2.6932
Average 3.0562 2.8508 2.6794
TABLE III: Performance on Vietnamese after pretraining on
different languages for the 5M, 12M, and 27M models. The
area under the curve (AUC) of the validation loss measured
while training on Vietnamese varies depending on the pre-
training language. Pretraining on English consistently results
in better transfer than pretraining on any other language.
Highlighted rows correspond to the languages selected for
extended probing.
Model Effective Size
P
Onset of Plasticity Loss
T
5M 4,932,480 6
12M 12,072,256 6
27M 27,922,752 16
39M 39,389,440 18
53M 53,610,304 54
83M 83,176,704 54
106M 106,101,632 62
314M 314,841,600 118
TABLE IV: Onset of plasticity loss, in number of tasks,
for each model size. The onset was obtained by taking the
minimum of the change in AUC plots after applying a moving
average of window size 3.
belief about how the onset,T, scales with model size,P. To
encode the belief that onset increases by a constant amount per
14
===== [PAGE 15] =====
Percentage Change in AUC 
Due to Pretraining
-4 %
Cycle
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180
-3 %
-2 %
-1 %
0 %
1 %
2 %
5M Model
Moving Average of Window Size 3
Onset of Plasticity Loss
Cycle
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 170
-7.4 %
-7.0 %
-6.6 %
Percentage Change in AUC 
Due to Pretraining
39M Model
Moving Average of Window Size 3
Onset of 
Plasticity Loss
Cycle
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 170
-6.6 %
-6.2 %
-5.8 %
-5.4 %
27M Model
Moving Average of Window Size 3
Onset of 
Plasticity Loss
Cycle
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
-9.0 %
-8.5 %
-8.0 %
-7.5 %
Moving Average of Window Size 3
Onset of 
Plasticity Loss
83M Model
Cycle
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 170
-4 %
-3 %
-2 %
-1 %
0 %
-5 %
Moving Average of Window Size 3
Onset of 
Plasticity Loss
12M Model
Cycle
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
-8.0 %
-7.6 %
-7.2 %
-6.8 %
Moving Average of Window Size 3
Onset of 
Plasticity Loss
53M Model
Cycle
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Moving Average of Window Size 3Onset of 
Plasticity Loss
-9.8 %
-9.6 %
-9.4 %
-9.2 %
-9.0 %
106M Model
Percentage Change in AUC 
Due to Pretraining
Cycle
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Moving Average of Window Size 3
Onset of 
Plasticity Loss
-12.8 %
-12.4 %
-12.0 %
-13.2 %
314M Model
Fig. 9: Extended probing in the Multilingual Continual Learning Problem. Each point is the AUC of the validation loss during
the probing task divided by the AUC when training on the Vietnamese language alone. The yellow line corresponds to a
moving average with a window size of 3. The red dot corresponds to the onset of plasticity loss used for building predictive
models as a function of model size. The onset of plasticity loss occurs later with increasing model size.
parameter, we fitted a linear model:T=a+b·P. To encode
the belief that the onset increases by a constant amount per
order-of-magnitude increase in parameters, we fitted a linear-
log model:T=a+b·lnP. We fitted the exponential model:
T=a·e b·P , which encodes the belief that each additional
parameter has a compounding effect on the onset.
Finally, we fitted the log-log model:lnT=a+b·lnP,
which suggests the onset grows multiplicatively with model
size, i.e., multiplyingPby a scalar changesTby a constant
factor.
We compared the four models using theR 2 value, the
root-mean-squared error computed on the data (in-sample
RMSE), and the RMSE computed using a leave-one-out
cross-validation (out-of-sample RMSE). The coefficients and
comparison metrics are given in Table V. Figure 10 shows
the fitted line of each model. Of all the models, the log-log
models scored the best.
APPENDIXC
CORRELATES OFPLASTICITYLOSS IN THEMULTILINGUAL
LEARNINGPROBLEMS
In this appendix, we present extended results about the
correlates of plasticity loss. In Figure 11, we show the
correlates of loss of plasticity in the Continual Multilingual
Learning Problem for the models omitted in the main text:
5M, 27M, 39M, 83M, and 314M. The results are consistent
with the discussion in the main text. While average weight
magnitude tends to increase and the models often accumulate
dormant units, lazy heads, and collapsed heads, these effects
do not exactly match the deterioration in performance due to
plasticity loss.
Figure 12 shows the correlates of plasticity loss for the
models trained in the Multilingual Stationary Learning Prob-
lem. Yet again, we saw an accumulation of dormant units and
collapsed heads as the models lost plasticity. The percentage of
lazy heads increased only in the 27M models, while the 5M
and 12M models remained at zero percent collapsed heads.
The lack of accumulation of collapsed heads is consistent
with the results in the continual learning setting, where the
5M and 12M models had close to zero percent of collapsed
heads during the first two cycles, i.e., the first 80 billion tokens
of training. The average weight magnitude also increased
over time, but did not seem to match the effect of loss of
plasticity, as it continued to increase while performance was
still improving in the probing tasks.
Figures 11 and 12 emphasize the unreliability of the corre-
lates of loss of plasticity. Nevertheless, they signal potential
pathological changes happening inside the network that could
be addressed through the approaches discussed in the main
text.
15
===== [PAGE 16] =====
Model Coefficients R2 In-Sample
RMSE
Out-of-Sample
RMSEName Formula Name Value STE
LinearT=a+b·P a12.9086 6.3401 0.8914 11.827 31.113b3.5937×10 −7 5.12×10 −8
Linear-logT=a+b·lnP a−431.4626 88.0119 0.8288 14.852 24.615b26.9574 5.0018
Exponential T=a·e b·P a24.459 6.830 0.7844 16.668 588.914b5.0992×10 −9 1.07×10 −9
Log-loglnT=a+b·lnP a−11.2501 1.8077 0.8969 11.524 17.864b0.8269 0.1027
TABLE V: Comparison of four functional forms for predicting the onset of plasticity loss,T, as a function of effective
parameter count,P. Coefficients are reported with their standard errors (STE). The in-sample root-mean-squared error (RMSE)
was measured on the data points used to fit the model, whereas the out-of-sample RMSE was computed using leave-one-out
cross-validation.
Model Size
Onset of Plasticity Loss
 (Task-Instance Number)
Linear-Log
107 108
5M 12M
27M
39M
106M
53M 83M
314M
Observed
Fitted Line
101
102
Log-LogExponential
107 108
101
102
Observed
Fitted Line
5M 12M
27M
39M
106M
53M 83M
314M
107 108
5M 12M
27M
39M
106M
53M 83M
314M
101
102
100
10-1
Observed
Fitted Line
107 108
101
102
Observed
Fitted Line
5M 12M
27M
39M
106M
53M 83M
314M
Linear
Model Size Model Size Model Size
Fig. 10: Comparison between different models for predicting the onset of plasticity loss.
Average Weight Magnitude
0.056
4M Model
0.060
0.064
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Percentage of Dormant Units
0 %
10 %
20 %
30 %
20 %
Percentage of Collapsed Heads
24 %
28 %
32 %
20 %
15 %
10 %
5 %
0 %
Percentage of Lazy Heads
27M Model
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
5 %
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
10 %
15 %
20 %
10 %
0 %
20 %
10 %
0 %
0.0404
0.0406
0.0408
0.0410
0.0412
83M Model
Cycle
10 20 30 40
Cycle
10 20 30 40
Cycle
20 30 4010
Cycle
10 20 30 40
30 %
40 %
50 %
0 %
4 %
8 %
12 %
20 %
15 %
10 %
5 %
0 %
0.0287
0.0288
0.0289
0.0290
0.0291
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
39M Model
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Cycle
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
15 %
20 %
25 %
30 %
0 %
4 %
8 %
12 %
2 %
6 %
10 %
0.0367
0.0371
0.0369
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Cycle
 Cycle
10 20 30 40
0.01818
0.01816
0.01814
0.01812
0.01810
Cycle
10 20 30 40
1 %
0 %
2 %
3 %
Cycle
10 20 30 40
0 %
10 %
20 %
30 %
Cycle
10 20 30 40
5 %
15 %
25 %
35 %
314M Model
Fig. 11: Average weight magnitude, percentage of dormant units, percentage of collapsed heads, and percentage of lazy heads
for the 5M, 27M, 39M, and 83M models.
16
===== [PAGE 17] =====
Average Weight MagnitudePercentage of Dormant UnitsPercentage of Collapsed HeadsPercentage of Lazy Heads
4M Model
0.060
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
0.058
0.056
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
8 %
6 %
4 %
2 %
0 %
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
20 %
22 %
24 %
26 %
28 %
30 %
32 %
34 %
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
-4 %
0 %
4 %
100B
Pretraining Tokens
200B 300B 400B 500B
0.0404
0.0408
0.0412
0.0416
27M Model
100B
Pretraining Tokens
200B 300B 400B 500B
1 %
3 %
5 %
7 %
100B
Pretraining Tokens
200B 300B 400B 500B
16 %
20 %
24 %
100B
Pretraining Tokens
200B 300B 400B 500B
0 %
10 %
20 %
30 %
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
0.0465
0.0475
0.0485
0.0495
12M Model
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
0 %
5 %
10 %
15 %
20 %
25 %
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
20 %
25 %
30 %
4 %
Pretraining Tokens
10B 20B 30B 40B 50B 60B 70B 80B
-4 %
0 %
15 %
Fig. 12: Correlates of loss of plasticity for the 5M, 12M, and 27M models trained on the Multilingual Stationary Learning
Problem. The metrics followed a similar trend to the Multilingual Continual Learning Problem, but none of them exactly
matched the trend in plasticity loss.
17